I think a big part of the difference is just levels. You won't find low level players hanging around Yew trees because they can't actually use them. You won't find high level people mining Bronze because they've long since outgrown the use for them. There's nothing to really fix there--it's just logical.
This extends to minigames, too, where a player's ability to actually participate is limited by their levels. A low level player is a waste of space in a game like, say, Stealing Creation where a high level player would just be infinitely more useful.
RuneScape in its entirety is sectioned off into tiers. Other MMOs are like this as well, since high level players have no reason to return to low-level zones.
The kinds of things that bring people together are ones where stats are irrelevant--things like holiday events and big world events offer that.
I feel like a big part of why new players are leaving isn't necessarily that RuneScape is a grind, but that it's not immediately rewarding to level skills. Why in the world would I level Runecrafting when I can just buy runes? Why level Smithing to 99 when I can cut logs for a bit and afford a full set of rune armour? There's something to be said for feeling good just for the work put in, but I don't feel that people feel... good about it.
To give you a concrete example, I wanted to do everything on my own. I was restricting myself to Ironman rules before the new update. What I found was that, if I wanted to be a Warrior, I'd spend weeks and weeks crafting armor that I wouldn't use just to be able to make a set of armor that I could have bought in an under an hour. If I wanted to be a Mage, I'd spend hours crafting runes that I could have bought in minutes.
Players need to feel like their effort means something. I'd love to pour my heart and soul into a set of armor that I can really be proud of--even at level 10. Armor that's just for me, that's got my name on it, that's better than what I could buy from someone else because I made it.
Does that make sense?